MultiRun v 0.0.11
==========

A Matlab tool for facilitating parameter calibration of DETIM/DEBaM.
Given a valid ```input.txt```, MultiRun can take arbitrary ranges of 
arbitrary numbers of model
parameters, and then execute DEBaM or DETIM for every permutation
of these parameters. Model output is directed into folders with
unique alphanumeric names to ensure that output data is not overwritten,
and that lengthy model runs do not need to be repeated. Model performance of each
run is tabulated in a single output file 'multi_performance.txt' which includes
the content of 'modelperformance.txt' generated by detim/debam plus additional
parameters (such as the correlation between measured and observed point balances).
'Multi_performance.txt' can then be analyzed by the user to extract the best parameter
configuration(s) for the studied case.

As of version 0.0.8, MultiRun is compatible with versions 2.x.x of DEBaM and DETIM,
and incompatible with earlier versions.  Version 0.0.7, which is compatible
with earlier versions on the models, is still available
[here](https://github.com/fmuzf/matlab_hk_MultiRun/releases).


### What you need:
  1. Matlab and Compiled versions of DEBaM or DETIM.
  2. A valid ```input.txt``` file for the models. In this file, you
     should set all of the parameters you would like the model
     to use, with the exceptions of those MultiRun will change for each model run.
  3. Input data for the models. See the model documentation for
     setting these up.
 

Installation
------------
1. Download and compile the latest version of
    [DEBaM and DETIM](https://github.com/regine/meltmodel).
    MultiRun supports versions 2.x.x of the models.
    If you already have a copy on your computer, there is no
    need the re-download the model, just use the copy you
    currently have.
2. Download MultiRun, either with ```git```, or download the
    [zipball](https://github.com/fmuzf/matlab_hk_MultiRun/archive/master.zip).
3. *Important*: Move the folder ```+MultiRun``` into your Matlab Path; it's
    not enough to navigate to the containing folder with Matlab, as the script
    changes the working directory. Mathworks has helpful documentation 
    [about the Matlab Path](http://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/matlab_env/what-is-the-matlab-search-path.html)
    and [how to change it](http://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/pathtool.html).
4. Check that Matlab can find MultiRun by trying:

    ```matlab
    which MultiRun.modelMultiRun
    ```
    in Matlab. This should return the filename of your installed copy of MultiRun,
    if Matlab tells ou somotheing like "'MultiRun.modelMultiRun' not found."
    double check that ```+MultiRun``` was placed into the Matlab path.
5. You're done! MultiRun is now available to Matlab, and you can access
    its functions and classes via ```MultiRun.<function/classname>```.


Using MultiRun to Execute DEBaM/DETIM
-----------


1. Configure an ```input.txt``` parameter file for DEBaM/DETIM. Set all of the
    parameters for the model run to the values you want them to be when the model
    is run, except for the values you will change using MultiRun, these can be
    set to anything. 
2. Open Matlab.
3. Run the ```MultiRun.modelMultiRun``` command:

    ```
    [hashes, status, err, changes, runs] = MultiRun.modelMultiRun(<model filename>, <base input.txt>,  <varargin>)
    ```
    Where you set:
    * ```<model filename>``` to the full path and file name of the executeable for debam (or detim, if you're
    going to run detim), on your machine.
    * ``` <base input.txt>``` to the full path and file name of the base```input.txt```.
    * ```<varargin>``` to the parameters you want changed in your base ```input.txt```.
    The syntax here is similar to that of  Matlab's ```plot``` function; you enter a list of
    key-value pairs for the parameters you wish to change, i.e. if we want ```icekons```
    to take on all of the values between 5 and 6, at intervals of 0.1, and ```rockkons```
    to take on every value between 0 and 0.5, at intervals of 0.025, we would call

    ```
    [hashes, status, err, changes, runs] = MultiRun.modelMultiRun(<model path+filename>, <base input.txt>, 'icekons', [5:0.1:6], 'rockkons', [0:0.025:0.5])
    ```
    
    To increase readability you may define variables for specifying the model and input.txt (Note 
    that the variable name modelName and InputName are arbitrary and you need to adjust the paths to your case):
    ```
    modelName = '/reginefolder/MODEL/SOURCE/github/source/meltmodel/bin/detim';
    ```
    ```
    InputName = '/reginefolder/MODEL/SOURCE/github/source/meltmodel/example/input.txt';
    ```
    ```
[hashes, status, err, changes, runs] = MultiRun.modelMultiRun(modelName, InputName, 'icekons', [5:0.5:6], 'firnkons', [360:

  ```

The example includes 2 parameters to be calibrated (e.g. altered in the model runs) but you can include as many as you like at the
same time. Just add more including their ranges with the same syntax as above.

### Output
  Output of each model run is located in a subdirectory of the ```outpath```
    specified in the base ```input.txt```, you will find new subdirectories
    in ```outpath``` with long alpha-numeric names, e.g.

```
<base outpath>
  ├── a729f3b8529edf74e2d57cf64ba8cc91fc64907e
  │   └── model_output
  ├── cdad489ead2ec45681e9a5ec91516623c88433ce
  │   └── model_output
  ├── d5c3a35650dcde462cc5eaea301cfbb62cd050d9
  │   └── model_output
  └── fbf399de8a6ac388aad1647ad918d37f9a3d81f1
      └── model_output
```
Each directory contains:
* The ```input.txt``` for *this* run of the model, with parameters changed from
the base parameter file.
* A ```changes.txt``` file which describes the changes made to the original ```input.txt```.
* A directory ```model_output```, containing the output from this run of the model.
This is ```outpath``` in ```input.txt``` for this model run.
* A file ```runstatus.lock```. This assists ```MultiRun``` to prevent re-running
this parameter configuration more than once. If you need to re-run this
configuration, delete ```runstatus.lock``` before doing so.

#### Model Performance
In addition, the ```outpath``` folder specified in your base ```input.txt```
will contain a  tab-seperated file ```multi_performance.txt```.
This file contains a summary of model performance statistics, changes made
to the base ```input.txt```.  Additionally, the SHA-1 hash, which determines the
output folder for that specific run, is listes so that the outout of any particular
model run can be easily found.
 ```multi_performance.txt``` can then be used to extract the best parameter configuration(s) based
 on the multi-criteria performance statistics. The user should try to maximize r2-values for discharge and/or
 point balances, and minimize the discharge difference, the point balance RMSE. In addition,
 modeled total balance can be compared with measured total balance over the entire simulation period
 (e.g. by geodetic methods), if available. The final choice of parameter configurations may be subjective
 in case of ambiguous model performance for different criteria.

In Matlab, ```modelMultiRun``` has returned quite a bit of information to you
which you can use to further manipulate your finished runs. These are outlined
in the API below.

### Have Fun! 


API (Available Functions/Objects and How to Use Them)
------
It is possible to use MultiRun programmatically in your Matlab scripts,
below is the API describing 


## function modelMultiRun

To run the model multiple times the function ```modelMultiRun``` is available.

```[hashes, status, err, changes, runs] = MultiRun.modelMultiRun(modelpath, basefile, varargin)```

### Arguments: 

* ```modelpath``` - fully qualified path to the executable of the model you want to run (debam/detim).
* ```basefile``` - fully qualified path to a valid parameter file for the model, this will be modified based upon the the list of key-value
  pairs passed to varargin
* ```varargin``` - a list of key-value pairs which are modified, e.g.
 ```modelMultiRun('debam', 'input.txt', 'icekons', [5:0.1:6])```
 will run the model with ```icekons``` set to each value in ```[5:0.1:6]```.

### Returns:
* ```hashes``` - Cell array of hashes of each run (yields the name of a model run's output folder)
* ```status``` - status(i) = Array of return status of run with hash hashes{i}
* ```err``` - Error messages associated by incomplete runs
* ```changes``` - array of changes made to input.txt
* ```runs``` - a container.Maps indexed by hashes of HashedRun objects,
   each corresponding to a single model run.

### E.g.
Let ```base_input.txt```, be a valid parameter file for DEBaM/DETIM (aside from the file name),
and a copy of ```detim``` be located at ```/home/luser/local/bin/detim```.
In Matlab, we run:
```
basefile = '/home/luser/base_input.txt';
modelpath = '/home/luser/local/bin/detim';
[hashes, status, err, changes, runs] = MultiRun.modelMultiRun(modelpath, basefile, 'icekons', [5, 6.0], 'firnkons', [350, 351]);
```
at the command line. MultiRun will take the parameter file
from ```/home/luser/base_input.txt``` and generate ```input.txt```
 files which contain every combination of the parameters
```icekons``` and ```firnkons```, given the values you've assigned them
(in this case there are four combinations).
Each generated file is placed in a directory whose name is the SHA-1 hash
of the modified parameter file, and the model's output is directed to that folder as well.
If ```outpath``` is set to ```/home/luser/mytest``` in ```base_input.txt```,
this model run will result in a directory structure which looks like:

```
mytest/
└── output
    ├── a729f3b8529edf74e2d57cf64ba8cc91fc64907e
    │   └── model_output
    ├── cdad489ead2ec45681e9a5ec91516623c88433ce
    │   └── model_output
    ├── d5c3a35650dcde462cc5eaea301cfbb62cd050d9
    │   └── model_output
    └── fbf399de8a6ac388aad1647ad918d37f9a3d81f1
        └── model_output
```
After generating the parameter file, Matlab changes its
current working directory to the folder containing the parameter
file, and executes the command in ```modelpath``` (in our example ```detim```).
Model output is put into the folder ```<hash>/model_output```.

```modelMultiRun``` also writes a file ```changes.txt```
which lists the changes made to to the original parameter file for that run, i.e.:
```bash
$ cd mytest/output/a729f3b8529edf74e2d57cf64ba8cc91fc64907e/
$ ls
changes.txt     input.txt      outpath        runstatus.lock
$ cat changes.txt
Base parameter file: /home/luser/mytest/input.txt
New parameter file: /home/luser/mytest/output/a729f3b8529edf74e2d57cf64ba8cc91fc64907e/index.txt
Changes made:
  icekons = 6
  firnkons = 350
```

### What happens:
For each run, MultiRun uses the helper class ```MultiRun.HashedRun``` to
generate a nearly-unique alpha-numeric identifier for that particular model run.
This is done by:
- Generating an ```input.txt``` file from the passed parameters,
- Taking the SHA-1 hash of the text in this file
- Modifying the ```outpath``` parameter of the ```containers.Map``` containing
  the configuration to ```<original-outpath>/<SHA hash>/outpath/```.

multiModelRun returns several cell-arrays; entries with the same index correspond to the same model run
  1. ```hashes```: the SHA-1 hash of the ```input.txt``` parameter files
  2. ```status```: Returned status of the model run.
  3. ```err```: Sting detailing any errors encountered; is empty if none occur
  4. ```changes```: Strings listing any changes made to ```base_input``` for this run
  5. ```runs```: a ```containers.Map``` object, whose keys are the hashes of each run, and whose
    values are the HashedRun objects of each run.

- HashedRun checks to see whether or not there is already a parameter file in the new output path.
  This is done by checking a lockfile ```runstatus.lockfile```, the contents of which
  tell whether or not this parameter file has been run, is currently running, or is waiting to
  be run.
- If no lockfile is found, the new configuration file is written
  to disk at ```<original-outpath>/<SHA hash>/input.txt```.

- If a lockfile is found, it's status is returned and an error is posted.
- The model is run as a system subprocess, if any errors occur ```status[i]``` is
 set, and an error message is returned.
- In particular, if every entry in ```status``` is ```1```, we know that
 every model run exited successfully.


Each run is managed by a helper class called ```HashedRun```. The ```HashedRun``` class
manages the run; building a directory structure for that run alone, and ensuring that
each configuration is only run once.

## class HashedRun

Each run is managed by a ```HashedRun``` class, which makes the
appropriate directories, checks to see if the run has been completed
previously 


### Methods: 
  - ```hr = MultiRun.HashedRun(config, model)```
       Object constructor function
       __Arguments__: 
      * ```config```: The text of a valid Model 'input.txt'
      * ```model```: the fully-qualified path for the model executable

  - ```[success, err] = genConfig(self)```
       Generate this run's input.txt, and write it to disk.
       __Returns__: 
       * ```success``` : success code is
          - 0 something has gone wrong
          - 1 parameter file has been generated
          - 2 parameter file already existed
       * ```err```: error message, if empty everything is fine

  - ```[success, err] = runModel(self)```
       Execute the model, checking to make sure that the model hasn't run
       already.
       __Returns__:
       * ```success```: codes for completion are:
          - 0 : an error has occurred
          - 1 : The model has been run successfully
          - 2 : the lockfile indicates the model has
          already run
       * ```err```: error message.  

### Properties: 
  - ```configMap```: Map container containing info for the model run
  - ```hash```:  SHA-1 hash of input.txt corresponding to configMap
  - ```model```: Fully qualified path to model executable
  - ```outPath```L Path where model will be outputting
    

License
-------
BSD
